Now, who can install the packages in a Linux
operating system?
The answer is the administrators.
And in the case of Ubuntu, it would be called
a sudoers, that is, they could run a command
as an administrator or a superuser.
So, su for super user and do to execute, so
sudo a command can be executed by those who
are listed in the file called etc sudoers.
Now, even to actually view the file, it is
etc sudoers, you must be listed in that particular
file.
So, let us just check that out, and then,
we would go on to try how to install packages
by actually running a demo.
To install the software updates or new software
into the system, you will need to be a super
user or an administrator.
The superuser privileges are listed in a file
called slash etc slash sudoers, let us explored
that using an example.
Here I have a terminal in which I am logged
in as a guest.
So, I check who I am, so I am logged in as
a guest and I can view the contents of the
etc sudoers file only if I am actually present
with those privileges in that particular file,
and we can check whether we have those privileges
or not.
And when I run this, it would ask for the
password and let us say I make a mistake in
giving the password so there is a usual error
that is for the password failure.
But if you give it correctly, then it would
go on to check whether the user name is present
in the sudoers list or not.
And if the privileges are not sufficient,
then there will be a message that you cannot
actually proceed further.
And there is also a message that the incident
will be reported.
So, what does it mean?
It means that the administrator can find out
that a regular user is trying to gain superuser
privileges and has failed on a service that
belongs to someone else this could be a problem,
but if it is on your own machine, there is
nothing to worry.
Let us check, how does one find out whether
such a failure has happened.
So, I will now come out of this particular
terminal and I am now in the terminal where
I am logged in as gphani, which is the regular
user for this machine, and also present in
the sudoers list, and I can verify that now.
I am logged into this terminal as gphani which
will be the first user for this particular
machine, and therefore also present in the
sudoers list.
So, let me just check that out by looking
at the file contents of the sudoers.
And it is asking me for the password, so I
give that properly, and then, if I am having
that privilege, then it would be showing the
contents of the sudoers file, which is available
in front of you now.
And this file shows that apart from the root
user, and myself, there is also one more user
who has the superuser privileges.
Every other user will be denied permission
to install software on this particular mission.
Now, what did we mean when we said that the
superuser can find out a failed attempt to
have the superuser privileges by any other
user, so that would be available in a log
file.
And we know that most of the logs are kept
in slash var slash log and auth dot log is
the file where these events are reported so
we could look at the last 100 lines of this
particular file.
And again, this auth log is also only for
super users, so we go ahead and use the superuser
privileges for that.
And we now see that in the output, there is
a entry here saying that there is a authentication
failure for the guest user and the message
is saying that user is not in the sudoers
list.
And later on, I was successful in becoming
a super user from the regular account, so
you could also see that here, where it opens
the superuser permissions for a particular
user UID zero.
So here you can see that the successful usage
of superuser privileges by the user gphani
is documented, so the log book also tells
you who managed to gain the administrator
privileges and who did not, and so one should
look at these logs time to time.
So, when you are installing a package, the
system knows from which website these packages
have to be downloaded for installation.
So, where is this information stored?
So, it is stored in a folder called a slash
etc slash apt, so we will go there and explore
that folder shortly.
And there are two files that we have to look
up.
The one is a folder called sources dot list
and another is a directory called sources
dot list dot d, in which there are different
entries, which come because you have added
those sources for the Debian packages as a
part of a third-party software.
For example, Google Chrome, or Microsoft Teams
or Zoom etc.
So, let us go to that folder slash etc slash
apt.
And you can see from here there are these
files and sources dot list is a file that
we wanted to look at, so cat sources dot list.
And you can see here that most of these lines
are actually comments because they start with
the hash, but the ones with the do not have
a comment character are the ones which are
active.
And you can see that here, the Debian packages
are being fetched from a website called in
dot archive dot ubuntu dot com.
The in this for India, so you would have this
particular entry made during the installation
of the Ubuntu operating system and it would
be different for different countries so that
Ubuntu would have a mirror that is closest
to your country to fetch the packages.
And here in this particular string, there
is also the name of the version that you are
going to use, and also certain other fields
that would tell you which type of packages
are being held by that particular repository.
And there are multiple repositories.
So, you would have the main packages that
are there in one repository, and there is
another repository in which updates are being
kept.
And then sometimes there are also repositories
for source codes, so you could see here that
there is a repository for the source code,
which is at this moment blocked out because
the starting with a hash character, which
means, it has been commented out.
So, this file is what contains the information
about which location the Debian packages are
being fetched for installation on the system,
when you run commands to either install or
update or upgrade the packages on your operating
system.
Now, what about the folder sources dot list
dot d.
So, sources dot list dot d, if you go to that
folder, then you can see that there are certain
other entries.
So, we would go and look at what is in the
Google Chrome.
And you will see that there is a repository
that has been added, which is coming from
the Google website.
So, dl dot google dot com is a website from
which the Debian package meant for the Google
Chrome application are being fetched.
So, the advantage of this is that whenever
Google upgrades the version of the Google
Chrome, then the package management system
would automatically know the upgrade is available
and would fetch the latest version and install
it on your operating system when you do the
upgrade of the packages.
So, that also means that you do not have to
worry, when is the next version available,
it would be pushed to you through the package
management system as part of the apt update
command that you would run, to fetch the updates
of all the packages that are installed on
your system from the repositories that are
configured in these files.
Like source dot list, or google chrome dot
list, etc.
Now, let us see what do we mean by fetching
the updates.
So, this is a command that you have to run
as a superuser, so sudo apt-get update.
What does it do when you run this command
is that it would actually contact the package
management system apt-get would contact the
repositories for any updates that are available
for any of the packages, and then fetches
those updates and keeps them in the cache.
And then when you want to upgrade the packages,
these updates are then applied depending upon
which packages are actually installed on your
system.
So, when you run sudo within a few minutes
of authenticating, then it will not ask for
a password.
But if quite some time has been elapsed, then
it would ask for the password again.
As you can see that the updates are being
fetched from various repositories.
And depending upon the network speed or the
network connectivity, it could take some time
and usually you would wait for it to finish
and return control back to you on the prompt.
So, once you are done, it will also tell you
how much data has been fetched and at what
speed etc.
And now the control is back to the prompt.
So, what you could do now is to apply all
the upgrades that are available for the packages
that have been installed till now.
So, let us do that, it is a good habit to
do that every now and then.
So, what I would do is that I will actually
do it every day.
So, I try to keep the operating system up
to date with respect to all the versions that
are given by the Ubuntu so that if there are
any security upgrades, then they will be available
immediately.
So, every now and then it is a good idea to
run this command sudo-apt get upgrade.
So, first you run update to get the updates
and upgrade to upgrade the packages.
So, when you run this command, it would actually
list how many updates are going to be affected
and how much of data is going to be downloaded.
So, you could actually see that right now
the update is going to fetch 272 megabytes
of data.
So sometimes if you are traveling and you
do not have a very good network connectivity,
you may want to wait before doing the upgrade.
So, keep an eye on this particular data.
And then if it is okay to download that patch
of data then you can go ahead and accept so
the capital Y is for the accept which is default,
so you can go ahead and just press Enter to
accept the fetching all the updates.
And depending upon the amount of data the
patching of updates would take some time.
So, wait patiently and let all the updates
be done so that your operating system is up
to date.
Every now and then you will also have the
firmware upgrades from the Linux which are
very critical to ensure that the hardware
compatibility.
When it says processing triggers, it means
that the downloading and installing is complete
and it is just finishing up certain actions
that are required upon installation of those
particular upgrades.
So, the control is back to the command prompt,
which means that the upgrades are done.
So, you could actually now check whether there
are any further updates and upgrades, so you
could run the commands once more.
Usually, if there are no more updates pending,
then it would just be done quite quickly.
Now, it is also telling you to do some more
action that is to auto remove which means
that there are some packages that came as
a requirement for some other packages and
they are now no longer required because newer
versions of those have been already installed,
so you can actually save some space by removing
those packages.
And you are not telling which package to be
removed, so you are leaving it to the package
management system which is a good idea, and
it is saving me 494 megabytes of data on my
disk because I am removing the unnecessary
packages which are of an older version.
So, the control is back to the command prompt.
So, the auto remove command has been completed.
Now, you can actually look at the other operations
also.
So, to remove a package and to add a package
and we would identify the fortunes package
as one which we could play with because it
is an optional utility which we can remove
as our as per our wish, so.
So, I am now trying to remove a package, and
it is asking me to confirm so we will do that
and it goes on to remove that particular package.
And once it removes the package, I should
not have access to the command fortune, so
let me remove the package called fortune mod
which contains the fortune cookies that are
being displayed on the screen where I ran
the command the fortune.
So, I accept it.
And now I will try to run the command fortune,
and it says there is no such command which
means that the utility has been removed from
the system.
Now, I want to bring it back, all that I have
to do is to install that package.
So, I will do that right away, and there are
no additional packages required and therefore
there is no confirmation being asked, and
the utility has been installed.
And you could see that if I run the command,
then it works and there is some fortune cookie
that is being displayed on the screen.
So, you could also do the reinstallation.
So, you could also say, apt-get reinstall
package, so, it would go ahead and then refresh
the version.
And sometimes we do it when there is any problem
with some of the utilities by mistake, we
removed some configuration file of a particular
package and we want to just fetch the package
once more, and we could also do that using
the apt-get command.
So, here are the utilities that we have tried
till now, apt-get update to synchronize the
package overview files between the system
and the repository.
And then to upgrade all the installed packages
to their latest versions are taking into account
the conflicts etc. apt-get upgrade will do
the job.
And then you can install a package by simply
typing apt-get install package name.
And then if you want to reinstall it, you
could also do that by using the command reinstall
package.
And all these commands will require sudo,
as a prefix, because these operations will
modify the operating system and therefore
they are allowed only for the super users
or administrators.
So sudo permission is required for you to
run these commands.
Now, we have also done one more action, namely
to remove packages that were automatically
installed to satisfy a dependency, and not
needed now because the packages have been
upgraded beyond those versions, so you could
save some disk space by removing those files
and apt-get auto remove would do that for
you.
Now, you could also do one more action to
clean up the disk by running the command apt-get
clean.
Normally, we do not do that because to revert
back a particular version it may be okay to
keep the retrieved package files.
Sometimes you want to remove the package files
and the configuration files, as well as the
original Debian package file to install that
package from your system, because you are
running short of the storage of the hard disk
and you could do that by using the purge command.
We normally do not do that because we would
like to save bandwidth by keeping the package
files in the system so that we could install
them readily when we need.
Now, let us explore the dpkg package management
system, which is at a lower level allows for
installation of a package directly when you
download a deb file from the Internet.
It is not recommended unless you know what
you are doing.
Now, there is a directory that you would like
to explore to see some information about the
packages, so we would go there and have a
look.
So, var lib dpkg is a folder where text information
is available about various packages that are
there on your system, so let us go there and
explore what is out there.
So, we are here in var lib dpkg, and you see
that there are some files, so let us first
look arch file.
So, it tells what are the architectures for
which the packages have been installed on
this system.
So, you could see that though my computer
is a 64-bit machine, I also have some 32-bit
executables installed.
This is for some library files that may be
required for compatibility reasons.
And then there is a large file 181 kilobytes
which is called the available, so we would
look at that by the less command.
And you can see that it actually has a list
of the packages along with its full information
one after the other and this is one place
from where when you ask for information about
a package, it will be taken out and shown
to you on the screen.
You also have a file called status which tells
you whether a particular package has been
installed or not.
Obviously, this file will be much larger than
available because the number of packages that
you have installed will always be much less
than what are possible from the open to repository.
So, let us look at the status file and you
will see that whether it is installed or not.
So, you can see the status here tells you
whether it has been installed or not.
And there is also a directory called info,
and there you have got a set of files for
each of the packages that are installed and
it would actually have also some information
about the md5sum and such signatures that
you may want to verify.
So, let us explore files for a particular
package let us say wget, so, ls wget star
and you could see that there are three files.
So, ls minus l, wget, so, you can then see
what are those pieces of information that
we have.
So, more wget dot con files, and it will show
you that there is one configuration file that
comes along with the wget, which would be
etc wget rc.
And then wget dot list will tell you information
of what all the files that would get copied
onto the system when you install this package
called wget.
And wget dot m5sums will actually show you
what all the md5sums of that of the files
that have been installed on your system and
you could actually now confirm whether some
of them have been tampered by the system because
of unauthorized access to your system.
And let us do that now.
So, user bin wget has a particular md5sum
so we would write md5sum some user bin wget
and you see that it matches with what is there
here.
And this is something that we could actually
do to ensure that no executable or library
in the system has been tampered compared to
file originally sent by the Ubuntu as a vendor
of that particular software package.
So, here are some utilities that we could
try by using the dpkg command where we could
list all the packages, which match a particular
pattern because we are looking for the name
of the package.
We do not know the name exactly, so we start
with few characters and look for the names.
Also, we can see what all the files that came
with a particular package or we can also see
the status of a particular package, and we
can also search for a particular package from
where a file has been installed.
So, you know the name of the file, but you
do not know the name of the package from where
it came, so you could also look up that by
using the minus capital S option of the dpkg
command.
So, let us look at these using a demo.
So, dpkg with the minus option minus l let
us say and nmap as a keyword would actually
see that there are no packages that have been
installed with that particular command.
So, that means, that I have not installed
that particular package yet.
So, I will go ahead and install it.
Now, that it is installed, I would go ahead
and run it again, and now you see that there
is some information that comes up which tells
that this particular package has been installed,
and it has some information about the architecture
and the description etc.
The version, the name, and the revision etc.
So, all this information are available from
the dpkg command with a minus l option.
Now, what are the various files that are provided
by this you can actually check.
So, you see that the nmap when you install
this package, these are all the various files
that are being added to the system.
So, you could see that user bin nmap is actually
coming from this package, but also nping for
example or the man file coming from the nmap
also is here for example.
So, when you install a package, the manpage
is coming in and also certain other utilities
bundled along with the particular main executable.
And you would also see that the manpage is
coming with the multiple languages also.
Now, you can actually find out the status
of a particular package by typing the minus
s option.
So, it now says that yes, it is installed,
and what is the priority and etc.
So, this is the same output which comes from
apt-cache show command, and it is actually
asking it to via the dpkg command on the backend.
And it also gives you a very detailed information
about that particular utility.
And if you have asked that about any other
package, you will also know whether it has
been installed or not.
Now, let us say there is a particular executable
which you want to know which package has led
to that particular executable being made available.
And so, you could search for that by the commander
with a minus capital S option, and let us
say the executable I want to look up is user
bin perl.
So, it says that the perl base is the name
of the package from where this particular
executable has come.
So, which means that, I could now go and look
at some more information about that particular
package name because the package name is available.
So, dpkg minus the small s to show about the
package, and then here you see that information
is available.
It is an essential package comes into the
section called pearl.
And you would see information about the particular
package, that is a scripting language used
in many systems, scripts and utilities, so
you should not remove this particular executable
or the package.
And you would also see that it is maintained
by the Ubuntu developers directly.
So, now you can see that we have learnt about
how to install packages, how to upgrade them,
how to remove the packages, and how to fetch
updates about the packages and do an nmass
updation of the packages on the system etc,
using two major systems apt as well as dpkg.
Now, if we may want to search for all the
packages under a particular section or package
section, and that for that we would actually
look up a very low-level command, and I will
show that using a demo.
So, let us look at the manual page for dpkg-query.
So, this is a low-level tool which we do not
normally use, but it is basically to query
the dpkg database about all the packages.
And here is something that we would like to
learn minus w, minus w is to show the list
of packages, and let us also see one more
option that we will be finding of use minus
f that is a format in which we want the information
to be shown.
And what are the kinds of formats that are
possible, you will also look at the fields
which has, for example the section, so section
is one of the fields that we could use, and
some more fields are like for example, the
name of the package, binary colon package.
So, by combining these pieces of information,
we can actually ask the system to list the
packages as well as their sections in a particular
format by directly posing that query.
So, let us do that here minus f is giving
the format, and the format I would give as
follows.
So, I would like the section name to be there,
and then, I would also like the field, which
is basically the binary colon package to be
there.
And after that, I would like a enter symbol
to go to the next line.
And if I run that, now, I would actually see
a list of all the sections and within each
section, what are all the binary packages
that are installed in my system.
So, you can see that the list is quite long.
Now, whenever the list is quite long, you
know what to do.
So, you can pipe it to less and then you can
go through them one by one.
So, the first field is the name of the section
under which that particular package has been
categorized by Ubuntu, and the next item is
the name of the package that has come under
the particular section into the system upon
installation.
Now, what we do is that we would like to go
through section by so that we need sort so
let us sort it and after that go by page by
page.
So, what are we doing here?
So, we are running a query to list all the
packages with a particular format, namely,
the section has to be given after that the
name of the package has to be given, after
that a after that a new line.
And this listing has to be sorted, and then
it has to be displayed page by page.
So, you can see how we are actually using
the terminal environment to look at the list
of packages under the sections, as done by
the Ubuntu operating system and we are looking
at it page by page.
So, you can see that under the admin section
these are the various utilities that have
been installed, and then under the developer
section, these are the utilities.
And you can see that there is a bunch of editors
that have been installed.
So, the liberoffice tools are all coming under
the editors category, and the whole bunch
of fonts that have been installed.
And there is a Java utilities that have been
installed on my machine, and you could also
see that there are lot of library files that
have come into the system because they come
along with the utilities that we installed.
So, now, you see that there are also some
shells that have come up.
So, you can see that apart from the bash shell,
we also have other shells like csh, dash and
ksh also have been installed.
So, now you can see that you are looking at
the utility names under the categories, so
you want to learn more shells, then you can
see how many shells have been installed and
then go on to explore them separately that
is how you can actually explore tools, so,
that you have not been looking for consciously.
But now that they are available for you under
each category, then you can go through them
to be thorough about all the utilities that
come under a particular category.
Now, we would like to also look at only those
sections, which let us say command or a particular
category, so, let us say shells.
So, the way to do that is to filter the output.
And for filtering the output there is a command
called a grep, which we will be learning shortly.
But for now, I will just illustrate how nice
it is actually giving you the output as.
Now, you can see that we have filtered the
output to only choose to display those lines
which contain the word shells.
And you could see that the list of utilities
that come out of the category called shells
are displayed.
So, you can see that this grep command is
quite powerful in filtering the output that
is coming in to the pipe, and we will learn
more about that shortly.
So, here is what we have done using the dpkg
minus a small l for looking up a pattern by
which the packages are going to be looked
up.
Then minus capital L to list the files that
came when you install the package.
Minus small s to look at the status of the
particular package and minus capital S to
look at which package has brought that particular
file that you are looking for.
Now, if you have downloaded a deb file, you
could also install it using the minus i option
directly, but this is not a good idea because
it may have some dependencies which you will
have to bother about yourselves.
By default use package management system pointing
to a reliable repository such as the Ubuntu
itself or a reputed company, say Google, but
do not download Deb files from the internet
from unknown sources and install them on your
system because in the worst case it could
actually damage the operating system, and
sometimes it may also not just work because
there are dependencies which may have conflicts
with existing libraries and utilities on your
system so always leave these decisions to
the packaged management system, so that, the
process of installation upgradation will happen
smoothly.
And it is not a good idea to remove a package
using this command because you maybe removing
a package that is required by many other packages
and therefore, removing packages should be
also done using a package management system
like for example apt or synaptic or aptitude.
With that we come to the end of this session
on software management.
Please do read the documentation for the package
management that is relevant for your operating
system say apt or dpkg for Ubuntu or maybe
RPM or DNF for Red Hat Linux or OpenSuSE Linux
etc, and make yourself comfortable with various
options so that you are on top of the software
management of your computer.
One of the important things about the stability
of Linux operating system is that almost everything
that you would like is available from the
original maintainer of that particular flavor
of Linux operating system and in many ways
when you install a package the checks are
done to ensure the compatibility with the
existing libraries and therefore, the operating
system is generally stable if you follow the
standard practices for installation or upgradation
of software packages.
So, enjoy expanding your operating system
to have all the tools that you would ever
want to have on your system to learn various
tools that are required for your work without
having to worry about the compatibility issues.
In situations when the compatibility issues
cannot be resolved there are also alternative
methods available on a Linux operating system
such as through the snap or docker ad you
could explore them as alternatives whenever
you are unable to install a particular version
of a package, but usually that problem does
not arise as long as you are using a stable
software management system such as apt.